PackageTests.md, before:

Running Package Tests
=====================

Packages will have their own tests under `debian/tests`. We need to run those to ensure there are no regressions.

We use autopkgtest to run the tests in a VM or container.


Preparing a Testing Image
-------------------------

You'll need an image to test from. `autopkgtest` will build a suitable image for you. You may want to regenerate the image from time to time to cut down on the number of updates it must run.

The type of image you can use (chroot, container, or VM) depends on the restrictions in `debian/tests/control`(see https://salsa.debian.org/ci-team/autopkgtest/-/blob/master/doc/README.package-tests.rst)

Important restrictions:

 * `breaks-testbed`: This test is liable to break the testbed system. VM or container recommended.
 * `isolation-machine`: You must use a VM to run these tests.
 * `isolation-container`: You must use a VM or container to run these tests.
 * `needs-reboot`: The test reboots the machine, so you must use a VM or container.


#### Building a VM Image

Create an image like this (replacing focal with your release of choice):

    $ autopkgtest-buildvm-ubuntu-cloud -r focal -v --cloud-image-url http://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/daily/server

Note: Use `-m` to specify a closer mirror or `-p` to use a local proxy if it's slow.

Copy the resulting image (autopkgtest-focal-amd64.img) to a common directory like `/var/lib/adt-images`


#### Building a Container Image

    $ autopkgtest-build-lxd images:ubuntu/impish/amd64

You should see an autopkgtest image now when you run `lxc image list`.



### Run the Tests

#### In a VM, Manual

Make sure you're one directory up from your package directory and run:

    $ autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-mypackage mypackage/ -- qemu /var/lib/adt-images/autopkgtest-focal-amd64.img

Where:

 * `-U`: run apt-get upgrade
 * `-s`: stop and give you a shell if there is a failure. Good to debug
 * `-o dep8-mypackage`: Put your package name in here. Writes output report to the directory dep8-mypackage.
 * `mypackage/`: Put your package name here. The trailing slash tells it to interpret this as a directory rather than a package name.

Everything after the `--` tells it how to run the tests. `qemu` is shorthand for `autopkgtest-virt-qemu`.


#### In a VM, Using the PPA

    $ autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-mypackage-ppa --setup-commands="sudo add-apt-repository -y -u -s ppa:mylaunchpaduser/focal-mypackage-fixed-something-1234567" -B mypackage -- qemu /var/lib/adt-images/autopkgtest-focal-amd64.img

Where (in setup-commands):

 * `-y`: Assume "yes" for all questions
 * `-u`: Run apt-update
 * `-s`: Add the source line as well
 * `-B`: Don't build

Note: In this case, the package name **doesn't** have a trailing slash because we want to install the package.


#### In a Container, Using the PPA

The command only differs after the `--` part. For example:

    $ autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-mypackage-ppa --setup-commands="sudo add-apt-repository -y -u -s ppa:mylaunchpaduser/focal-mypackage-fixed-something-1234567" -B mypackage -- lxd autopkgtest/ubuntu/focal/amd64

#### In Canonistack

This is by far the closest in terms of "similarity" to the real autopkgtests since they also run in such an environment.
But it needs some preparation. First of all you must have been *unlocked for* and have set up [Canonistack](https://wiki.canonical.com/InformationInfrastructure/IS/CanoniStack-BOS01) for yourself.

In going through the set up process for Canonistack, you'll have created an openstack RC file that sets region, auth and other environment variables. Go ahead and source this file, if you haven't already.
Then you'd look for the image you want to boot like:

```
$ source ~/.canonistack/novarc_bos01
$ openstack image list | grep -i arm64 | grep hirsute
| 4d24cfbe-b6a5-4d84-8c50-b9f025d0dd43 | ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201124-disk1.img    | active |
| 1cfeacff-f04a-4bce-ab92-9d8fec7e5edb | ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img    | active |
```

[Finally to run the test on Canonistack](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/ProposedMigration#Reproducing_tests_in_the_cloud) is quite similar to the other invocations. Just two things change compared to "local" autopkgtest-runner invocations.

 * `--setup-commands setup-testbed` will have autopkgtest execute `/usr/share/autopkgtest/setup-commands/setup-testbed` on the target which converts any system into a system that is ready for autopkgtest to log in
 * `-- ssh -s nova` achieves two things
  * First of all it selects the ssh virtualization driver `autopkgtest-virt-ssh` to reach out to a remote system
  * Furthermore it selects the setup script `nova` from `/usr/share/autopkgtest/ssh-setup/nova` which happens to know how to deal with openstack

```
    # General pattern
    $ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail <mypackage>.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor m1.small --image <image> --keyname <yourkeyname>
```

```
    # One example
    $ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor m1.small --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
```

You can use usual openstack terms, like other flavors to size the VM that is used or other images to run the same test on different releases or architectures.

### Common options you'll need

#### Run against -proposed or subsets thereof

Quite often a test fails by running against new packages in the proposed pocket. Then it often will be helpful to check if the test needs other packages from proposed to resolve the issue. That can easily be done via the option `--apt-pocket`.

Commonly a test will run against all packages in release plus the new candidate from proposed, that would look like:

```
    --apt-pocket=proposed=src:yourpkg
```

To run against all packages that are in proposed, you'd simply not refer to a package

```
    --apt-pocket=proposed
```

And if instead you'd need a given set of packages, but not everything else from proposed you can use a comma separated list

```
    --apt-pocket=proposed=src:srcpkg1,srcpkg2
```

Examples testing various combinarions against octave-parallel:

```
# normal
autopkgtest --apt-pocket=proposed --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
# all proposed
autopkgtest --apt-pocket=proposed --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
# specific subset
autopkgtest --apt-pocket=proposed=src:octave,octave-parallel,octave-struct --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
```

#### Size the test VM

Quite often one might wonder "hmm, might this work with more CPU/memory"
At least in the case of qemu and nova that can be controlled.

For `qemu` you can add `--ram-size` and `--cpus`

Example to run the same test in different sizes:

```
autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu --ram-size=1536 --cpus 1 ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu --ram-size=4096 --cpus 4 ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
```

For `nova` one has to use [openstack flavors](https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/user/flavors.html). If unsure which ones are defined you can check with `openstack flavor list`. An example passing nova different sizes then would be:

```
$ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor m1.small --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
$ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor cpu4-ram8-disk20 --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
$ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor cpu8-ram16-disk50 --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
```

#### Restrict networking

Sometimes issues seem to happen only on autopkgtest infrastructure and part of
it is due to various networking restriction being present there. This isn't
replicating that 100% as there are also firewalls in place, but if in doubt
it often is worth to retry a local VM based repro with this to check if it
fails this way.

What you need to do is adding the internal proxy (needs VPN up); or if you want
to try another proxy of your choice that is rather restrictive. Then add this
to the call of autopkgtest `--env='no_proxy=127.0.0.1,127.0.1.1,localhost,localdomain,novalocal,internal,archive.ubuntu.com,security.ubuntu.com,ddebs.ubuntu.com,changelogs.ubuntu.com,ppa.launchpad.net' --env='http_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128'`

Example when we tracked down an issue with ulfius:
```
$ autopkgtest --env='no_proxy=127.0.0.1,127.0.1.1,localhost,localdomain,novalocal,internal,archive.ubuntu.com,security.ubuntu.com,ddebs.ubuntu.com,changelogs.ubuntu.com,ppa.launchpad.net' --env='http_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128' --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --shell-fail ulfius_2.7.1-3.dsc  -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-impish-amd64.img
```

### Save the Results

You'll see the tests run:

    autopkgtest [11:47:12]: version 5.3.1
    autopkgtest [11:47:12]: host karl-tp; command line: /usr/bin/autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-postfix-ppa '--setup-commands=sudo add-apt-repository -y -u -s ppa:kstenerud/postfix-postconf-segfault-1753470' -B postfix -- lxd autopkgtest/ubuntu/focal/amd64
    autopkgtest [11:47:31]: @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ test bed setup

    ...

    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Ran 15 tests in 67.027s

    OK
    autopkgtest [11:49:51]: test postfix: -----------------------]
    autopkgtest [11:49:51]: test postfix:  - - - - - - - - - - results - - - - - - - - - -
    postfix              PASS
    autopkgtest [11:49:52]: @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ summary
    postfix              PASS

Save the last part for the description for your merge proposal.

Commit message:

PackageTests.md: Add symptoms to look for with network restrictions

PackageTests.md, after:

Running Package Tests
=====================

Packages will have their own tests under `debian/tests`. We need to run those to ensure there are no regressions.

We use autopkgtest to run the tests in a VM or container.


Preparing a Testing Image
-------------------------

You'll need an image to test from. `autopkgtest` will build a suitable image for you. You may want to regenerate the image from time to time to cut down on the number of updates it must run.

The type of image you can use (chroot, container, or VM) depends on the restrictions in `debian/tests/control`(see https://salsa.debian.org/ci-team/autopkgtest/-/blob/master/doc/README.package-tests.rst)

Important restrictions:

 * `breaks-testbed`: This test is liable to break the testbed system. VM or container recommended.
 * `isolation-machine`: You must use a VM to run these tests.
 * `isolation-container`: You must use a VM or container to run these tests.
 * `needs-reboot`: The test reboots the machine, so you must use a VM or container.


#### Building a VM Image

Create an image like this (replacing focal with your release of choice):

    $ autopkgtest-buildvm-ubuntu-cloud -r focal -v --cloud-image-url http://cloud-images.ubuntu.com/daily/server

Note: Use `-m` to specify a closer mirror or `-p` to use a local proxy if it's slow.

Copy the resulting image (autopkgtest-focal-amd64.img) to a common directory like `/var/lib/adt-images`


#### Building a Container Image

    $ autopkgtest-build-lxd images:ubuntu/impish/amd64

You should see an autopkgtest image now when you run `lxc image list`.



### Run the Tests

#### In a VM, Manual

Make sure you're one directory up from your package directory and run:

    $ autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-mypackage mypackage/ -- qemu /var/lib/adt-images/autopkgtest-focal-amd64.img

Where:

 * `-U`: run apt-get upgrade
 * `-s`: stop and give you a shell if there is a failure. Good to debug
 * `-o dep8-mypackage`: Put your package name in here. Writes output report to the directory dep8-mypackage.
 * `mypackage/`: Put your package name here. The trailing slash tells it to interpret this as a directory rather than a package name.

Everything after the `--` tells it how to run the tests. `qemu` is shorthand for `autopkgtest-virt-qemu`.


#### In a VM, Using the PPA

    $ autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-mypackage-ppa --setup-commands="sudo add-apt-repository -y -u -s ppa:mylaunchpaduser/focal-mypackage-fixed-something-1234567" -B mypackage -- qemu /var/lib/adt-images/autopkgtest-focal-amd64.img

Where (in setup-commands):

 * `-y`: Assume "yes" for all questions
 * `-u`: Run apt-update
 * `-s`: Add the source line as well
 * `-B`: Don't build

Note: In this case, the package name **doesn't** have a trailing slash because we want to install the package.


#### In a Container, Using the PPA

The command only differs after the `--` part. For example:

    $ autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-mypackage-ppa --setup-commands="sudo add-apt-repository -y -u -s ppa:mylaunchpaduser/focal-mypackage-fixed-something-1234567" -B mypackage -- lxd autopkgtest/ubuntu/focal/amd64

#### In Canonistack

This is by far the closest in terms of "similarity" to the real autopkgtests since they also run in such an environment.
But it needs some preparation. First of all you must have been *unlocked for* and have set up [Canonistack](https://wiki.canonical.com/InformationInfrastructure/IS/CanoniStack-BOS01) for yourself.

In going through the set up process for Canonistack, you'll have created an openstack RC file that sets region, auth and other environment variables. Go ahead and source this file, if you haven't already.
Then you'd look for the image you want to boot like:

```
$ source ~/.canonistack/novarc_bos01
$ openstack image list | grep -i arm64 | grep hirsute
| 4d24cfbe-b6a5-4d84-8c50-b9f025d0dd43 | ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201124-disk1.img    | active |
| 1cfeacff-f04a-4bce-ab92-9d8fec7e5edb | ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img    | active |
```

[Finally to run the test on Canonistack](https://wiki.ubuntu.com/ProposedMigration#Reproducing_tests_in_the_cloud) is quite similar to the other invocations. Just two things change compared to "local" autopkgtest-runner invocations.

 * `--setup-commands setup-testbed` will have autopkgtest execute `/usr/share/autopkgtest/setup-commands/setup-testbed` on the target which converts any system into a system that is ready for autopkgtest to log in
 * `-- ssh -s nova` achieves two things
  * First of all it selects the ssh virtualization driver `autopkgtest-virt-ssh` to reach out to a remote system
  * Furthermore it selects the setup script `nova` from `/usr/share/autopkgtest/ssh-setup/nova` which happens to know how to deal with openstack

```
    # General pattern
    $ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail <mypackage>.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor m1.small --image <image> --keyname <yourkeyname>
```

```
    # One example
    $ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor m1.small --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
```

You can use usual openstack terms, like other flavors to size the VM that is used or other images to run the same test on different releases or architectures.

### Common options you'll need

#### Run against -proposed or subsets thereof

Quite often a test fails by running against new packages in the proposed pocket. Then it often will be helpful to check if the test needs other packages from proposed to resolve the issue. That can easily be done via the option `--apt-pocket`.

Commonly a test will run against all packages in release plus the new candidate from proposed, that would look like:

```
    --apt-pocket=proposed=src:yourpkg
```

To run against all packages that are in proposed, you'd simply not refer to a package

```
    --apt-pocket=proposed
```

And if instead you'd need a given set of packages, but not everything else from proposed you can use a comma separated list

```
    --apt-pocket=proposed=src:srcpkg1,srcpkg2
```

Examples testing various combinarions against octave-parallel:

```
# normal
autopkgtest --apt-pocket=proposed --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
# all proposed
autopkgtest --apt-pocket=proposed --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
# specific subset
autopkgtest --apt-pocket=proposed=src:octave,octave-parallel,octave-struct --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
```

#### Size the test VM

Quite often one might wonder "hmm, might this work with more CPU/memory"
At least in the case of qemu and nova that can be controlled.

For `qemu` you can add `--ram-size` and `--cpus`

Example to run the same test in different sizes:

```
autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu --ram-size=1536 --cpus 1 ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --shell-fail octave-parallel_4.0.0-2ubuntu1~ppa1.dsc -- qemu --ram-size=4096 --cpus 4 ~/work/autopkgtest-hirsute-amd64.img
```

For `nova` one has to use [openstack flavors](https://docs.openstack.org/nova/latest/user/flavors.html). If unsure which ones are defined you can check with `openstack flavor list`. An example passing nova different sizes then would be:

```
$ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor m1.small --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
$ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor cpu4-ram8-disk20 --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
$ autopkgtest --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --setup-commands setup-testbed --shell-fail systemd_247.3-1ubuntu2.dsc -- ssh -s nova -- --flavor cpu8-ram16-disk50 --image ubuntu/ubuntu-hirsute-daily-arm64-server-20201125-disk1.img --keyname paelzer_canonistack-bos01
```

#### Restrict networking

Some DEP8 test failures occur due to the autopkgtest environment's
network restrictions.  A good clue of this is when the tests pass
reliably locally yet fail after uploading to Launchpad.  Other clues
include test logs mentioning port errors, inaccessible URLs or IPs, and
upstream language packaging tools like npm, compose, pip, etc.

The network restrictions can be mimicked by invoking autopkgtest locally
with an internal proxy.  This isn't replicating that 100% as there are
also firewalls in place, but if in doubt it often is worth to retry a
local VM based repro with this to check if it fails this way.

What you need to do is adding the internal proxy (needs VPN up); or if you want
to try another proxy of your choice that is rather restrictive. Then add this
to the call of autopkgtest `--env='no_proxy=127.0.0.1,127.0.1.1,localhost,localdomain,novalocal,internal,archive.ubuntu.com,security.ubuntu.com,ddebs.ubuntu.com,changelogs.ubuntu.com,ppa.launchpad.net' --env='http_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128'`

Example when we tracked down an issue with ulfius:
```
$ autopkgtest --env='no_proxy=127.0.0.1,127.0.1.1,localhost,localdomain,novalocal,internal,archive.ubuntu.com,security.ubuntu.com,ddebs.ubuntu.com,changelogs.ubuntu.com,ppa.launchpad.net' --env='http_proxy=http://squid.internal:3128' --no-built-binaries --apt-upgrade --shell-fail ulfius_2.7.1-3.dsc  -- qemu ~/work/autopkgtest-impish-amd64.img
```

### Save the Results

You'll see the tests run:

    autopkgtest [11:47:12]: version 5.3.1
    autopkgtest [11:47:12]: host karl-tp; command line: /usr/bin/autopkgtest -U -s -o dep8-postfix-ppa '--setup-commands=sudo add-apt-repository -y -u -s ppa:kstenerud/postfix-postconf-segfault-1753470' -B postfix -- lxd autopkgtest/ubuntu/focal/amd64
    autopkgtest [11:47:31]: @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ test bed setup

    ...

    ----------------------------------------------------------------------
    Ran 15 tests in 67.027s

    OK
    autopkgtest [11:49:51]: test postfix: -----------------------]
    autopkgtest [11:49:51]: test postfix:  - - - - - - - - - - results - - - - - - - - - -
    postfix              PASS
    autopkgtest [11:49:52]: @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@ summary
    postfix              PASS

Save the last part for the description for your merge proposal.
